# Page 0

439
Maughan RJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:439–455. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027
IOC consensus statement: dietary supplements and 
the high-performance athlete
Ronald J Maughan,1 Louise M Burke,2,3 Jiri Dvorak,4 D Enette Larson-Meyer,5 
Peter Peeling,6,7 Stuart M Phillips,8 Eric S Rawson,9 Neil P Walsh,10 Ina Garthe,11 
Hans Geyer,12 Romain Meeusen,13 Lucas J C van Loon,3,14 Susan M Shirreffs,1 
Lawrence L Spriet,15 Mark Stuart,16 Alan Vernec,17 Kevin Currell,18 Vidya M Ali,19 
Richard GM Budgett,20 Arne Ljungqvist,21 Margo Mountjoy,22,23 Yannis P Pitsiladis,19 
Torbjørn Soligard,20 Uğur Erdener,19 Lars Engebretsen20 
Consensus statement
To cite: Maughan RJ, 
Burke LM, Dvorak J, 
et al. Br J Sports Med 
2018;52:439–455.
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Professor Ronald J Maughan, 
School of Medicine, St Andrews 
University, St Andrews, UK;  
 
ronmaughan@
 
st-
 
andrews.
 
ac.
 
uk
Accepted 3 February 2018
 ► http://  dx.  doi.  org/  10.  1136/  
bjsports-
 
2018-
 
099199
Abs Tr ACT
Nutrition usually mak
es a small but potentially 
valuable contribution to successful performance in elite 
athletes, and dietary supplements can make a minor 
contribution to this nutrition programme. Nonetheless, 
supplement use is widespread at all levels of sport. 
Products described as supplements target different 
issues, including (1) the management of micronutrient 
deficiencies, (2) supply of convenient forms of energy and 
macronutrients, and (3) provision of direct benefits to 
performance or (4) indirect benefits such as supporting 
intense training regimens. The appropriate use of some 
supplements can benefit the athlete, but others may 
harm the athlete’s health, performance, and/or livelihood 
and reputation (if an antidoping rule violation results). A 
complete nutritional assessment should be undertaken 
before decisions regarding supplement use are made. 
Supplements claiming to directly or indirectly enhance 
performance are typically the largest group of products 
marketed to athletes, but only a few (including caffeine, 
creatine, specific buffering agents and nitrate) have good 
evidence of benefits. However, responses are affected 
by the scenario of use and may vary widely between 
individuals because of factors that include genetics, the 
microbiome and habitual diet. Supplements intended 
to enhance performance should be thoroughly trialled 
in training or simulated competition before being used 
in competition. Inadvertent ingestion of substances 
prohibited under the antidoping codes that govern 
elite sport is a known risk of taking some supplements. 
Protection of the athlete’s health and awareness of 
the potential for harm must be paramount; expert 
professional opinion and assistance is strongly advised 
before an athlete embarks on supplement use.
In
T
rodu
CTI
on
Dietary supplements are used by athletes at all levels 
of sport, reflecting the prevalence of their use in the 
wider society. About half of the adult US popula-
tion uses some form of dietary supplements,
1 and 
although there are regional, cultural and economic 
differences, a similar prevalence is likely in many 
other countries. Athletes describe a range of 
different reasons for their supplement choices,
2 and 
products that fit the description of ‘supplement’ 
can target various roles within the athlete’s perfor-
mance plan. These include the maintenance of 
good health by contributing to the required intake 
of specific nutrients, the management of micro-
nutrient deficiencies, and the provision of energy 
and macronutrient needs that might be difficult to 
achieve through food intake alone. Other specific 
uses of supplements reported by athletes include 
direct performance enhancement or the indirect 
benefits that arise from the provision of support 
for hard training, the manipulation of physique, the 
alleviation of musculoskeletal pain, rapid recovery 
from injury and enhancement of mood.
Some sporting bodies now support the pragmatic 
use of supplements that have passed a risk-ver -
sus-benefit analysis of being effective, safe and 
permitted for use, while also being appropriate to 
the athlete’s age and maturation in their sport. This 
review summarises the issues faced by high-per -
formance athletes and their support team (coach, 
trainer, nutritionist, physician) when considering 
the use of supplements, with the goal of providing 
information to assist them to make informed 
decisions.
Wh AT Is A  supplemen T ?
There is no single definition, either legal or within 
nutritional science, of what constitutes a dietary 
supplement. The US Congress, for example, in 
framing the 1994 Dietary Supplement Health and 
Education Act (DSHEA; https://
 
ods.
 
od.
 
nih.
 
gov/
 
About/
 
DSHEA_
 
Wording.
 
aspx), described a dietary 
supplement as:
‘…a product, other than tobacco, which is used in 
conjunction with a healthy diet and contains one or 
more of the following dietary ingredients: a vitamin, 
mineral, herb or other botanical, an amino acid, a 
dietary substance for use by man to supplement 
the diet by increasing the total daily intake, or a 
concentrate, metabolite, constituent, extract, or 
combinations of these ingredients’.
3
This definition is unsatisfactory, as it depends on 
whether or not a ‘healthy diet’ is consumed. For 
the purposes of this overview, we define a dietary 
supplement as the following:
A food, food component, nutrient, or non-food 
compound that is purposefully ingested in addition 
to the habitually
 consumed diet with the aim of 
achieving a specific 
health and/or performance 
benefit.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on May 1, 2026 http://bjsm.bmj.com/Downloaded from 14 March 2018. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027 on Br J Sports Med: first published as

# Page 1

440
Maughan RJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:439–455. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027
Consensus statement
Furthermore, we recognise that dietary supplements come in 
many forms, including the
 
following:
1.
 functional 
foods, foods enriched with additional nutrients or 
components outside their typical nutrient composition (eg, 
mineral-fortified and vitamin-fortified, as well as nutrient-
enriched foods)
2.
 formulated foods and 
sports foods, products providing 
energy and nutrients in a more convenient form than normal 
foods for general nutrition support (eg, liquid meal replace-
ments) or for targeted use around exercise (eg, sports drinks, 
gels, bars)
3.
 single 
nutrients and other components of foods or herbal 
products provided in isolated or concentrated forms
4.
 multi-ingredient 
products containing various combinations of 
those products described above that target similar outcomes.
prev A len C e of, A nd r ATI on A le for, use by A T hle T es
With such widespread use of supplements in the general popu-
lation and with the specific focus of athletes on achieving peak 
performance, it is not surprising that a high prevalence of supple-
ment use is reported in most surveys of athletes.
4 Comparisons 
between surveys are confounded by numerous factors: these 
include differences in the definition of what constitutes a dietary 
supplement; ability to capture irregular use; inappropriate 
sample selection; and the use of non-validated and non-stan-
dardised survey instruments.
5 Nevertheless, surveys generally 
suggest that supplement use:
1.
 varies across different sports and activities
2.
 increases with level of training/performance
3.
 increases with age
4.
 is higher in men than in women
5.
 is 
strongly influenced by perceived cultural norms (both 
sporting and non-sporting).
Although athletes often consume supplements to take 
advantage of intended/claimed effects or benefits, a range of 
motives underpin supplement use.
5 For example, athletes use 
supplements:
1.
 to correct or prevent nutrient deficiencies 
that may impair 
health or performance
2.
 for convenient 
provision of energy and nutrients around an 
exercise session
3.
 to achie
ve a specific and direct performance benefit in 
competition
4.
 to gain a perform
ance improvement indirectly accrued from 
outcomes such as allowing more effective training (ie, higher 
intensity, greater volume), better recovery from training 
sessions, optimising mass and body composition, or reducing 
risks of injury and illness
5.
 for financial 
gain (sponsorship) or because products are 
provided free of charge
6.
 as a ‘just in case’ insurance policy
7.
 because 
they know or believe that other athletes/competitors 
are using the supplement(s).
Some supplements may be used for multiple functions. Zinc, 
for example, may be taken with the aim of promoting wound 
healing and tissue repair,
6 or reducing the severity and dura-
tion of the symptoms of an upper respiratory tract infection. 7 
Carbohydrate supplements are used to enhance performance in 
many events via the provision of fuel substrate,
8 to support the 
immune system9 or to improve bioavailability of other supple-
ments, for example, creatine.10 Similarly, creatine supplementa-
tion may directly enhance performance in strength and power 
events, and can assist in training harder, gaining lean body mass 
or maintaining lean mass during periods of immobilisation 
after injury.
11–13 Decisions on supplement use therefore need 
to consider both the context of use and the specific protocol 
employed.
Assess Ing T he ev I den C e bA se for supplemen T  use
Supplements target a range of scenarios of use, so different 
approaches are needed to assess their effectiveness. Supplements 
aimed at correcting nutrient deficiencies need to be judged on 
their ability to prevent or treat suboptimal nutrient status, with 
the benefit accruing from the removal of the associated impair -
ment of health, training capacity or performance. The effec-
tiveness of sports foods might be hard to isolate when they are 
used within the general diet to meet everyday energy needs and 
nutrient targets. However, benefits may be more easily detected 
when they are specifically consumed before, during or after an 
event or training session to provide nutrients that are limiting 
for performance (eg, to provide fuel for the muscle or brain) or 
to defend homeostasis (eg, by replacing water and salt losses). 
Performance-enhancing supplements, which are claimed to 
achieve direct or indirect benefits, pose a greater challenge in 
terms of a sound evidence base. With only a few exceptions, 
there is a scarcity of research, and many of the available studies 
are not of sufficient quality to warrant their application to elite 
athletes.
Substantiating the claims made about performance supple-
ments and sports foods is difficult.
14 T o various audiences, ‘proof’ 
comes in different forms. Figure
 
1 provides a proposed hierar -
chical model of the relative strength of the evidence provided by 
different information sources. However, most of the information 
around supplement efficacy in sport comes from models with 
the lowest rigour: anecdotes/observations from athletes; and 
scientific or mechanistic hypotheses that explain how a supple-
ment might target a critical/limiting factor in performance, but 
with little to no evidence. Systematic reviews and meta-analyses, 
which synthesise the outputs of many studies to yield a conclu-
sive statement of efficacy in a broad sense, are at the top of 
the evidence hierarchy. While these summaries help to provide 
information about the general use of performance supplements, 
scientific trials that are properly controlled and well-conducted 
provide the basis for these reviews as well as an opportunity to 
address more specific questions about supplement applications. 
Thus, meta-analyses are a reflection only of the quality and 
quantity of the studies that are available for review, and may also 
be influenced by the inclusion and exclusion criteria applied to 
the available data.
The ‘gold standard’ for investigating the effects of supple-
ments on sports performance is the prospective, randomised, 
controlled scientific trial, in which subjects are randomly allo-
cated to receive either an experimental or placebo treatment 
(ideally in a double-blind manner) or crossed over to receive 
both treatments in counterbalanced order, under standardised 
conditions. Practical issues may cause some variations to ideal 
design, but sports scientists are encouraged, if they wish their 
results to be applicable to athletes in competition, to ensure that 
their studies include the following:
1.
 an 
adequate sample size and appropriate participant 
characteristics (eg, event, training status, calibre) to allow the 
results to have statistical power and to be applicable to high-
performance athletes
2.
  
mimicking, as far as possible, the conditions (eg, environ-
ment, nutrition preparation, event strategies) that exist in 
real-life competition
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on May 1, 2026 http://bjsm.bmj.com/Downloaded from 14 March 2018. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027 on Br J Sports Med: first published as

# Page 2

441
Maughan RJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:439–455. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027
Consensus statement
3. standardisation, to the extent that is possible, of variables 
that might influence the results (eg, pretrial ex
ercise and 
diet, environmental conditions, external encouragement 
or distraction)—it is recognised that this conflicts to some 
extent with (2) above, and will limit the situations in which 
the results can be applied
4.
 use of a 
protocol of supplement use (eg, specific product, 
dose and timing of intake) that is likely to optimise any effects
5.
 an independent verification of the contents 
of the supple-
ment under investigation to ensure that the product is truly 
unadulterated, both to ensure the integrity of the study and 
to avoid inadvertent doping positives if the subjects are 
athletes
6.
 verification 
that the supplement was taken and induced a 
biological response (eg, via muscle, blood, urine or saliva 
sampling)
7.
 a perform
ance protocol that is valid and sufficiently reliable 
to detect small but potentially meaningful changes/differ -
ences in performance outcomes
8.
 interpretation of 
results in light of the limitations of the 
study design and the change that would be meaningful to 
real-life sport.
Given the specificity of the information that is required by 
some athletes and their support staff to assess the effectiveness 
of a supplement (eg, related to a targeted event and its condi-
tions, the specific individual, the combination with other perfor-
mance strategies), it is unreasonable to expect that definitive 
evidence will always be available. Issues that are particularly 
under-researched and should be considered of high priority 
include measurement of performance in the field or under ‘real-
life’ conditions, investigation of the combined use of a number 
of supplements, and the repeated use of supplements as might 
occur in multiday competition or when heats and finals occur 
close together. Scenarios that fall outside the scope of the avail -
able literature or practical research design may need to be inter-
rogated by individual or small group case studies. Recommended 
methodologies for these studies include repeated baseline perfor-
mances before the introduction of the supplement, or an alter -
nating series of presentation and absence of the supplement.
15
For the purposes of this overview, we rely primarily on studies 
of healthy adults that are relevant to athletes. We recognise that 
data from studies of elite athletes are almost entirely absent. We 
also recognise that mechanistic studies on animal and cell culture 
models are useful in identifying mechanisms, but a mechanism 
is not necessary to demonstrate an effect that may be mean-
ingful to an athlete: what we think today to be the mechanism 
by which enhancement of performance or health occurs might 
be proved wrong by later studies. It must also be recognised that 
an individual’s habitual diet can affect gene expression and their 
microbiota, and these in turn can affect response to supplemen-
tation. While the variation in the genome between individuals is 
less than 0.01%, the variation in microbiota is significant (80%–
90%), and emerging data suggest that both these factors could 
affect athletic performance.
16 17 The following sections present 
an overview of the use of supplements to address different roles 
in sports nutrition, first by identifying the principles of use and 
then by examining some of the specific products that have a 
good or emerging evidence base to support this situation-spe-
cific use by athletes.
supplements used to prevent or treat nutrient deficiencies
Many micronutrients play an important role in the regula-
tion of processes that underpin sports performance, ranging 
from energy production to the manufacture of new cells and 
proteins. A frank deficiency of one or more of these nutri-
ents may lead to a measurable impairment of sports perfor -
mance—either directly or by reducing the athlete’s ability to 
train effectively (eg, iron deficiency anaemia) or to stay free 
from illness or injury (eg, impact of vitamin D deficiency on 
bone health). Athletes are not immune to the inadequate eating 
practices or the increased nutrient loss/requirements found in 
some members of the general population and may even be at 
greater risk of deficiencies because of increased nutrient turn-
over or increased losses. A further challenge is the occurrence 
of subclinical deficiencies that may be both hard to assess 
(ie, they lack a clear metric or universal threshold of what is 
‘adequate’) as well as being subject to debate about whether 
there is an ‘optimal’ level for performance that differs from 
the usual classification systems of nutrient status (deficiency/
subclinical deficiency/normal). When suboptimal nutritional 
status is diagnosed, the use of a nutrient supplement to reverse 
f igure 1 Hierarchy of evidence used to establish good practice focused on  the issue of nutritional supplements.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on May 1, 2026 http://bjsm.bmj.com/Downloaded from 14 March 2018. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027 on Br J Sports Med: first published as

# Page 3

442
Maughan RJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:439–455. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027
Consensus statement
or prevent further deficiencies can contribute to the overall 
treatment plan.
Nutritional assessment of an athlete involves systematic 
protocols that obtain, verify and interpret evidence of nutri-
tion-related problems, as well as their causes and significance. 
A complete assessment should ideally include a detailed medical 
and nutritional history, diet evaluation, anthropometry and body 
composition analysis, and biochemical testing.
18 Unlike the ad 
hoc use of nutrient supplements taken by athletes as an insurance 
policy, this nutritional assessment should ensure that the athlete:
1.
 can address 
the factors that led to the nutrient deficiency, 
including ensuring that the athlete’s nutrition plan is 
adequate in energy, macronutrients and micronutrients
2.
 would 
benefit from an acute or chronic period of supplemen-
tation to correct and/or prevent a nutrient deficiency and can 
understand the appropriate supplementation protocol
3.
 is 
not at risk for health issues associated with supplement use, 
including interactions with prescription or over-the-counter 
medications
4.
  has 
a baseline assessment against which future measures to 
assess progress can be compared.
Nutrients that often need to be supplemented under these 
circumstances include iron, calcium and vitamin D (table
 1
). 
Iodine (for those living in areas with low levels of iodine in foods 
or not using iodised salt), folate (for women who might become 
pregnant) and vitamin B
12 (for those following a vegan or near-
vegan diet) supplementation may be warranted in these popula-
tion groups, but these considerations do not apply specifically 
to athletes.
supplements (sports foods) used to provide a practical form 
of ener
gy and nutrients
Sports nutrition guidelines provide clear recommendations for 
targeted intake of energy and nutrients in a variety of contexts. 
In some situations, it is impractical for an athlete to consume 
‘everyday’ or normal foods to meet their nutrition goals due 
to issues around preparation or storage, ease of consuming the 
foods due to training schedules, gut comfort, or the challenge 
of meeting nutrient targets within the available energy budget. 
In these cases, sports foods can provide a convenient, although 
usually more expensive, alternative option for meeting these 
nutrient goals. T able
 2
 provides an overview of products that fit 
this description and their more common evidence-based uses.
supplements that directly improve sports performance
A few performance-enhancing supplements might, at the present 
time, be considered to have an adequate level of support to 
suggest that marginal performance gains may be possible. These 
supplements include caffeine, creatine (in the form of creatine 
monohydrate), nitrate, sodium bicarbonate and possibly also 
Beta-alanine. The mechanisms of action, typical dose, poten-
tial performance benefits and known side
 
effects of each of 
these supplements are summarised in table
 3
. Performance-en-
hancing supplements should be considered only where a strong 
evidence
 base 
supports their use as safe, legal and effective, 
and ideally after adequacy of sports nutrition dietary practices 
is ensured. Whenever possible, supplements should be trialled 
thoroughly by the athlete in training that mimics the competi-
tion milieu as closely as possible before committing to use in a 
competition setting. Athletes should do a careful risk analysis to 
see if the marginal gains would outweigh the risk of inadvertent 
doping due to contamination.
supplements that improve performance indirectly
Many dietary supplements claim to enhance performance indi-
rectly—by supporting the athlete’s health, body composition, 
and their ability to train hard, recovery quickly, adapt optimally, 
avoid or recover from injury, and tolerate pain or soreness. 
Illness is a major problem for athletes if it interrupts training 
or occurs at a critical time, such as during a selection event or a 
major competition. Susceptibility to illness is increased in situa-
tions where athletes are involved in a high volume of training or 
competition, and either intentionally or unintentionally expe-
rience deficits in energy intake (eg, weight
 
loss diets), macro-
nutrient intake (eg, train-low or sleep-low-carbohydrate) and 
micronutrient status (eg, vitamin D insufficiency in the winter).
19 
Athletes might benefit from nutritional supplements to support 
Table 1 Examples of micronutrients often requiring supplementation in athle tes (see Larson-Meyer et al18 for additional information)
micronutrient o verview d iagnosis and outcomes of insufficiency p rotocols and outcomes of supplementation
Vitamin D It is important in the regulation of 
gene transcription in most tissues, so 
insufficiency/deficiency affects many body 
systems.
42
Many athletes are at risk of insufficiency 
at various times throughout the year.
43
No consensus over the serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D 
concentration (the marker of vitamin D status) that 
defines deficiency, insufficiency, sufficiency and a 
tolerable upper limit.
The need to supplement depends on UVB exposure 
and skin type.
Supplementation of between 800 IU and 1000–2000 IU/day is 
recommended to maintain status for the general population. 
Supplementation guidelines are not yet established in athletes. 
Short-term, high-dose supplementation which includes 50 000 
IU/week for 8–16
 weeks or 10 000 IU/day for several weeks may 
be appropriate for restoring status in deficient athletes
. Careful 
monitoring is necessary to avoid toxicity.44
Iron Suboptimal iron status may result from 
limited iron intake, poor bioavailability 
and/or inadequate energy intake, or 
excess iron need due to rapid growth, 
high-altitude training, menstrual blood 
loss, foot-strike haemolysis, or excess 
losses in sweat, urine or faeces.
45
Several measures performed simultaneously 
provide the best assessment and determine the 
stage of deficiency. Recommended measures: 
serum ferritin, transferrin saturation, serum 
iron, transferrin receptor, zinc protoporphyrin, 
haemoglobin, haematocrit  and mean corpuscular 
volume.
46
Athletes who do not maintain adequate iron status may need 
supplemental iron at doses greater than
 their RD
A (ie, >18
 mg/
day for women and >8
 mg/day for men).
 Athletes with iron 
deficiency require clinical follow-up, which may include 
supplementation with larger doses of oral iron supplementation 
along with improved dietary iron intake.
45 Numerous oral iron 
preparations are available and most are equally effective as long 
as they are taken.
47 High-dose iron supplements, however, should 
not be taken unless iron deficiency is present.
Calcium Avoidance of dairy products and other 
calcium-rich foods, restricted energy 
intake and/or disordered eating increases 
risk of suboptimal calcium status.
45
There is no appropriate indicator of calcium status. 
Bone mineral density scan may be indicative 
of chronic low calcium intake, but other factors 
including suboptimal vitamin D status and 
disordered eating are also important.
Calcium intakes of 1500
  mg/day and 1500–2000 IU vitamin D 
are recommended to optimise bone health in athletes with low 
energy av
ailability or menstrual dysfunction.45
Note: Indiscriminate supplementation with any of the above nutrients is not recommended. Deficiencies should first be identified through nutritional assessment, which includes 
dietary intake and the appropriate blood or urinary marker, if available.
17
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on May 1, 2026 http://bjsm.bmj.com/Downloaded from 14 March 2018. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027 on Br J Sports Med: first published as

# Page 4

443
Maughan RJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:439–455. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027
Consensus statement
immunity in these scenarios and at other times when they are 
either susceptible to infection (eg, during the common cold 
season and after long-haul travel) or suffering from an infec-
tion. T able
 
4 summarises evidence for some of the commonly 
promoted ‘immune supportive’ supplements, noting that the 
most promising candidates to assist in the prevention or treat-
ment of upper respiratory symptoms are vitamin D and probi-
otics. Vitamin C during periods of heavy exertion and zinc 
lozenges at the onset of symptoms may be useful, but high doses 
of single antioxidants, particularly vitamins C and E, may blunt 
exercise-induced training adaptations.
20–22 Probiotic supple-
mentation may reduce the incidence of travellers’ diarrhoea 
and gastrointestinal infection. Cochrane reviews have noted the 
low quality of many studies on nutritional supplements that are 
claimed to support immunity; specifically, small samples, poor 
controls and unclear procedures for randomisation and blinding 
were commonplace.
23 24  Clearly, there is a pressing need for 
randomised controlled trials in high-level athletes with sufficient 
participant numbers, rigorous controls and procedures, appro-
priate supplementation regimens, and clinically meaningful 
measures of immunity.
Supplements that assist an athlete to train harder, recover more 
quickly and prevent injury, or accelerate return to play when 
injury does occur can obviously enhance the athlete’s prepara-
tion and, indirectly, their competition outcomes. Many prod-
ucts claim to provide benefits of this nature; table
 5
 summarises 
the evidence for some of the most popular compounds. Finally, 
the manipulation of body composition, including gaining lean 
(muscle) mass and reducing body fat levels, can contribute to 
performance in many events. This explains the large number 
of ‘weight gainers’ and ‘fat burners’ in the general and sports 
supplement market, although many of these are prohibited in 
sport. Protein is considered to be the premier ingredient in 
weight gain-promoting supplements, and evidence-based reviews 
conclude that protein is effective at promoting lean mass gain 
when combined with resistive exercise.
25 Evidence of efficacy 
for ‘fat burning’ supplements is far from conclusive, however, 
and there is a complete absence of evidence for the effectiveness 
of the vast majority of supplements marketed in this category. 
T able
 6
 summarises the evidence for some of the most common 
ingredients or products of this type.25
Table 2 Summary of common sports foods and functional foods used by a thletes. 
sports food form T ypical composition Common sports-related use
Sports drink Powder or ready to drink liquid 5%–8%
 
CHO
10–35
 
mmol/L sodium
3–5
 
mmol/L potassium
Simultaneous delivery of fluid+CHO
 during exercise
P
ostexercise rehydration and refuelling
Energy drink Ready-to-drink liquid or 
concentrated shot
Carbohydrate, especially in typical ready-to-drink 
varieties
Caffeine
Note: may contain taurine, B vitamins and other 
ingredients with variable supporting evidence and some 
level of concern
Pre-exercise caffeine supplement
Carbohydrate and caffeine intake during exercise
Sports gel or sports 
confectionery
Gel: 30–40
 g sachets confectionery:
 
jelly-type confectionery (generally in 
pouch of ~40–50
 
g)
~25
 g CHO per sachet or ~5
 g CHO per confectionery 
piece
Some contain caffeine or electrolytes
Carbohydrate intak
e during exercise
Electrolyte 
replacement 
supplements
Powder sachets or tablets 50–60
 
mmol/L sodium
10–20
 
mmol/L potassium
Typically, low carbohydrate (2–4
 g/100
 mL)
Rapid rehydration following dehydration undertak
en for 
weight-making
Replacement of large sodium losses during ultra-
endurance activities
Rapid postexercise rehydration following moderate to 
large fluid and sodium deficits
Protein supplement Powder (mix with water or milk) or 
ready-to-drink liquid
Protein-rich bar, usually low in CHO
Provides 20–50
 g protein in a single serve from high-
quality types of animal (whey,
 casein, milk, egg) or 
vegetable (eg, soy) origin
Note: may contain other ingredients, some of which 
are not evidence-based and may increase the risk of 
contamination
Postexercise recovery following key training sessions or 
events where adaptation requiring protein synthesis is 
desired
Achievement of increase in lean mass during growth or 
response to resistance training
Portable nutrition for busy schedule or travel
Liquid meal 
supplement
Powder (mix with water or milk) or 
ready-to-drink liquid
1–1.5 kcal/mL: 15%–20% protein and 50%–70% CHO
Low to moderate fat
Vitamins/minerals: 500–1000
 mL supplies RDI/RD
As
Supplement high-energy diet (especially during heavy 
training/competition or weight gain)
Low-bulk meal replacement (especially pre-event meal)
Postexercise recovery (CHO and protein)
Portable nutrition for busy schedule or travel
Sports bar Bar 40–50
 
g CHO
5–10
 
g protein
Usually low in fat and fibre
Vitamins/minerals: 50%–100% of RDA/RDIs
Note: may contain other ingredients, some of which 
are not evidence-based and may increase the risk of 
contamination
CHO source during exercise
Postexercise recovery—provides CHO, protein and 
micronutrients
Portable nutrition for busy schedule or travel
Protein-enhanced food Milk, yoghurt, ice cream, cereal bars 
and other food forms
Increased protein content from normal food variety 
achieved by adding protein sources or filtration of 
water from product
Typically allows normal portion to provide ~20
 g 
protein to meet sports nutrition target
V
alue-added food able to achieve protein target for 
postexercise use or to improve protein content of other 
meals and snacks in an athlete’s diet
CHO, carbohydrate.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on May 1, 2026 http://bjsm.bmj.com/Downloaded from 14 March 2018. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027 on Br J Sports Med: first published as

# Page 5

444
Maughan RJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:439–455. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027
Consensus statement
Table 3 Supplements with good to strong evidence of achieving benefits to  performance when used in specific scenarios
Caffeine 
Overview Caffeine is a stimulant that possesses well-established benefits for athletic performance across endurance-based situations, and short-term, 
supramaximal and/or repeated sprint tasks.
Mechanism Adenosine receptor antagonism; increased endorphin release; improved neuromuscular function; improved vigilance and alertness; reduced the 
perception of exertion during exercise
29 48
Protocol of use 3–6  mg/kg of body mass (BM),  in the form of anhydrous caffeine (ie, pill or powder form), consumed ~60  min prior to exercise49
Lower caffeine doses (<3 mg/kg BM,  ~200  mg),  provided both before and during exercise; consumed with a CHO source48
Performance Impact Improved endurance capacity such as exercise time to fatigue 50 and endurance-based time-trial (TT) activities of varying duration (5–150 min),  
across numerous exercise modalities (ie, cycling, running, rowing and others)49
Low doses of caffeine (100–300  mg) consumed during endurance exercise (after 15–80  min of activity) may enhance cycling TT performance by 
3%–7%.51 52
During short-term, supramaximal and repeated sprint tasks, 3–6 mg/kg BM of caffeine tak en 50–60  min before exercise results in performance 
gains of >3%
 for task completion time
, mean power output and peak power output during anaerobic activities of 1–2
 min in duration,53 and of 
1%–8%
 for total work output and repeat sprint performances during intermittent team game activity.54 55
Further considerations and 
potential side effects
Larger caffeine doses (≥9
  mg/kg BM) do not appear to increase the performance benefit,56 and are more likely to increase the risk of negative 
side effects, including nausea, anxiety, insomnia and restlessness.29
Lower caffeine doses, variations in the timing of intake before and/or during exercise, and the need for (or lack thereof) a caffeine withdrawal 
period should be trialled in training prior to competition use.
Caffeine consumption during activity should be considered concurrent with carbohydrate (CHO) intake for improved efficacy.
52
Caffeine is a diuretic promoting increased urine flow, but this effect is small at the doses that have been shown to enhance  
performance.
57
Creatine
Overview Creatine loading can acutely enhance the performance of sports involving repeated high-intensity exercise (eg, team sports), as well as the chronic 
outcomes of training programmes based on these characteristics (eg, resistance or interval training), leading to greater gains in lean mass and 
muscular strength and power.
58 59
Mechanism Supplementation increases muscle creatine stores, augmenting the rate of PCr resynthesis, thereby enhancing short-term, high-intensity exercise 
capacity
60 and the ability to perform repeated bouts of high-intensity effort.
Protocol of use Loading phase: ~20
 g/day (divided into four equal daily doses),
 for 5–7
 days61
Maintenance phase: 3–5  g/day (single dose) for the duration of the supplementation period62
Note: concurrent consumption with a mixed protein/CHO source (~50 g of protein and CHO) may enhance muscle creatine uptak e via insulin 
stimulation.10
Performance Impact Enhanced maximum isometric strength 63 and the acute performance of single and repeated bouts of high-intensity exercise (<150 s duration);  most 
pronounced effects evident during tasks <30
 s13 61
Chronic training adaptations include lean mass gains and improvements to muscular strength and power.58 59
Less common: enhanced endurance performance resulting from increased/improved protein synthesis, glycogen storage and thermoregulation64 65
Potential anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects are noted.66
Further considerations and 
potential side effects
No negative health effects are noted with long-term use (up to 4
  years) when appropriate loading protocols are followed.67
A potential 1–2 kg BM increase after creatine loading (primarily as a result of w ater retention66 68) may be detrimental for endurance performance 
or in events where the BM must be moved against gravity (eg, high jump, pole vault) or where athletes must achieve a specific BM target.
n
itrate
Overview Dietary nitrate (NO3
− ) is a popular supplement that has been commonly investigated to assess any benefits for prolonged submaximal exercise69 
and high-intensity, intermittent, short-duration efforts.70 71
Mechanism Enhances nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability via the NO3
−-nitrite-NO pathway, playing an important role in the modulation of skeletal muscle 
function72
Nitrate augments exercise performance via an enhanced function of type II muscle fibres73; a reduced ATP cost of muscle force production; an 
increased efficiency of mitochondrial respiration; an increased blood flow to the muscle; and a decrease in blood flow to VO2 heterogeneities.74
Protocol of use High nitrate-containing foods include leafy green and root vegetables, including spinach, rocket salad, celery and beetroot.
Acute performance benefits are generally seen within 2–3
 hours following an NO3
− bolus of 5–9 mmol (310–560  mg).75
Prolonged periods of NO3
−  intake (>3 days) also appear beneficial to performance70 76 and may be a positive strategy for highly trained athletes, 
where performance gains from NO3
− supplementation appear harder to obtain.77
Performance impact Supplementation has been associated with improvements of 4%–25% in exercise time to exhaustion and of 1%–3% in sport-specific TT 
performances lasting <40
 min in duration.73 78
Supplementation is proposed to enhance type II muscle fibre function,73 resulting in the improvement (3%–5%) of high-intensity, intermittent, 
team-sport exercise of 12–40
 min in duration.70 71
Evidence is equivocal for any benefit to exercise tasks lasting <12  min.76 79
Further considerations and 
potential side effects
The available evidence suggests there appear to be few side effects or limitations to nitrate supplementation.
There may exist the potential for GI upset in susceptible athletes, and should therefore be thoroughly trialled in training.
There appears to be an upper limit to the benefits of consumption (ie, no greater benefit from 16.8
 mmol (1041
 mg) vs 8.4
 mmol (521
 mg)).80
Performance gains appear harder to obtain in highly trained athletes. 77
beta-alanine
Overview Beta-alanine augments intracellular buffering capacity,
 having potential beneficial effects on sustained high-intensity exercise performance.
Mechanism A rate-limiting precursor to the endogenous intracellular (muscle) buffer, carnosine; the immediate defence against proton accumulation in the 
contracting musculature during exercise
81
Chronic, daily supplementation of Beta-alanine increases skeletal muscle carnosine content.82
Protocol of use Daily consumption of ~65  mg/kg BM,  ingested via a split-dose regimen (ie, 0.8–1.6  g every 3–4  hours) over an extended supplement time frame of 
10–12
 
weeks82
Continued
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on May 1, 2026 http://bjsm.bmj.com/Downloaded from 14 March 2018. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027 on Br J Sports Med: first published as

# Page 6

445
Maughan RJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:439–455. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027
Consensus statement
Adverse effe CTs
Adverse effects from the use of supplements may arise from a 
number of factors, including the safety and composition of the 
product per se and inappropriate patterns of use by athletes. 
Poor practices by athletes include the indiscriminate mixing and 
matching of many products without regard to total doses of some 
ingredients or problematic interactions between ingredients. 
Even commonly
 
used products may have negative side
 effects, 
especially 
when used outside the optimal protocol. For example, 
iron supplementation in those with already adequate iron stores 
can result in symptoms that may begin with vomiting, diarrhoea 
and abdominal pain, and develop to haemochromatosis and 
liver failure.
26 Bicarbonate may cause gastrointestinal distress 
when ingested in amounts sufficient to enhance performance; 
this can impair rather than improve performance and may coun-
teract the benefits of other supplements taken at the same time.
27 
The ‘more is better’ philosophy, when applied to caffeine, may 
result in side effects, including nausea, anxiety, accelerated 
heart rate and insomnia, that outweigh the performance bene-
fits.
28 Unwanted outcomes become more common with caffeine 
doses  ≥9
 mg/kg
  body
  mass,
  but
  maximal
  benefits
  are
  usually
 
achieved 
with intakes of 3–6
 mg/kg.29 The possibility of more 
serious outcomes is illustrated by adverse, and potentially fatal, 
responses in two separate incidents in which very large doses 
(up to 30 g) of caffeine were administered to healthy volunteers 
participating in laboratory studies (http://www.
 telegraph.
 co.
 uk/
 
news/
 
2017/
 
01/
 
25/
 
university-
 
fined-
 
400k-
 
students-
 
taking-
 
part- 
caffeine-
 experiment/). 
These incidents were due to errors in 
the dose calculation: if this can happen in a university research 
environment with supposed oversight by experienced staff, the 
potential clearly exists for similar errors by athletes and coaches.
Athletes and members of their support team should be aware 
of the regulations that govern the manufacture and marketing 
of supplements. According to the 1994
 DSHEA (https://
 ods.
 od.
 
nih.
 
gov/
 
About/
 
DSHEA_
 
Wording.
 
aspx) passed by US Congress, 
nutritional supplements sold in the USA that do not claim to 
diagnose, prevent or cure disease are not subject to regulation by 
the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA). Similar regulations 
apply in most other countries, where supplements are regu-
lated in the same way as food ingredients and are therefore 
not subject to the stringent regulations that are applied to the 
pharmaceutical industry. This means that there is no require-
ment to prove claimed benefits, no requirement to show safety 
with acute or chronic administration, no quality assurance of 
content, and liberal labelling requirements. It is well-recognised 
that there are problems with some of the dietary supplements on 
sale, but the options open to those responsible for food safety 
are limited by the legislation that applies. The FDA regularly 
uses its powers to recall products in breach of the regulations, 
although they fully admit that their resources are insufficient 
for comprehensive monitoring, and recalls generally occur only 
after many people are harmed (ht
 
tps:
 
//ww
 w
.fd
 
a.go
 
v/food/
 
recall-
soutbreaksemergencie
 
s/
 
r
 
ecal
 ls/
 
d
 
efault.
 htm): 
they have recently 
recalled supplement products containing excessive doses of vita-
mins A, D, B
6 and selenium because of potentially toxic levels 
of these components. Examples of product complaints have 
included the presence of impurities, including lead, broken glass 
and metal fragments, because of the failure of the producers to 
observe good manufacturing practice. The risk of gastrointes-
tinal upset because of poor hygiene during the production and 
storage of products is also of concern. Although this may seem 
a minor inconvenience, and of similarity to food safety issues, 
the coincidence of problems around a crucial training period or 
competitive event may significantly interfere with the
 
athlete’s 
performance goals. It should be noted, though, that all of these 
problems are also regularly reported in normal foods.
Some supplements may actually cause harm to health, but 
these can be difficult to identify, and products are usually with-
drawn only after a significant number of adverse events have 
occurred. For example, a range of products containing hydroxy-
citric acid were withdrawn from sale, but only after they were 
linked with the death of one consumer and with a substantial 
number of other cases of liver toxicity, cardiovascular problems 
and seizures (https://www.
 
fda.
 
gov/
 
downloads/
 
safety/
 
recalls/
 
enforcementreports/
 ucm169089.
 pdf). The extent of the problem 
is illustra
ted by the fact that, in the USA in 2015, approximately 
Performance impact Small, but potentially meaningful performance benefits (~0.2%–3%) during both continuous and intermittent exercise tasks of 30  s to 10  min in 
duration82–84
Further considerations and 
potential side effects
A positive correlation between the magnitude of muscle carnosine change and performance benefit remains to be established.82
Large interindividual variations in muscle carnosine synthesis have been reported.85
The supplement effectiveness appears harder to realise in well-trained athletes.86
There is a need for further investigation to establish the practical use in various sport-specific situations.82 87
Possible negative side effects include skin rashes and/or transient paraesthesia.
s
odium bicarbonate
Overview Sodium bicarbonate augments extracellular buffering capacity, having potential beneficial effects on sustained high-intensity exercise performance.
Mechanism Acts as an extracellular (blood) buffer, aiding intracellular pH regulation by raising the extracellular pH, and HCO3− concentrations81 88
The resultant pH gradient between the intracellular and extracellular environments leads to efflux of H+ and  La− from the exercising muscle .88 89
Protocol of use Single acute NaHCO3 dose of 0.2–0.4 g/kg BM,  consumed 60–150  min prior to exercise90 91
Alternative strategies include the following:
Split doses (ie, several smaller doses giving the same total intake) taken over a time period of 30–180
 min92
Serial loading with 3–4 smaller doses per day for 2–4 consecutive days prior to an event 93–95
Performance impact Enhanced performance (~2%) of short-term, high-intensity sprints lasting ~60  s in duration,  with a reduced efficacy as the effort duration exceeds 
10
 
min90
Further considerations and 
potential side effects
Well-established GI distress may be associated with this supplement.
Strategies to minimise GI upset include the following:
Coingestion with a small, carbohydrate-rich meal (~1.5
 g/kg BM carbohydrates)96
Use of sodium citrate as an alternative97
Split dose or stacking strategies93–95
Given the high potential for GI distress, thorough investigation into the best individualised strategy is recommended prior to use in a competition 
setting.
Table 3 Continued  
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on May 1, 2026 http://bjsm.bmj.com/Downloaded from 14 March 2018. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027 on Br J Sports Med: first published as

# Page 7

446
Maughan RJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:439–455. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027
Consensus statement
Table 4 Nutritional supplements for immune health in athletes:  proposed mechanism of action and evidence for efficacy
supplement p roposed mechanism of action e vidence for efficacy
Vitamin D This is an essential fat-soluble vitamin known to influence 
several aspects of immunity, particularly innate immunity 
(eg, expression of antimicrobial proteins). Skin exposure to 
sunlight accounts for 90% of the source of vitamin D.
Moderate support
Evidence for deficiency in some athletes and soldiers, particularly in the winter (decreased 
skin sunlight exposure)
Deficiency has been associated with increased URS.
Recommend 1000 IU/day D
3 autumn-spring to maintain sufficiency
Further support required98
Probiotics Probiotics are live micro-organisms that when administered 
orally for several weeks can increase the numbers of 
beneficial bacteria in the gut. These have been associated 
with a range of potential benefits to gut health, as well as 
modulation of immune function.
Moderate support in athletes with daily dose of ~10
10 live bacteria
Cochrane review of 12 studies (n=3720) shows 
~50%
 decrease in URS incidence and 
~2
 day 
shortening of URS;
 minor side effects.
More evidence is required supporting efficacy to reduce gastrointestinal distress and 
infection, for example, in a travelling athlete.
23 99
Vitamin C This is an essential water-soluble antioxidant vitamin 
that quenches ROS and augments immunity. It reduces 
interleukin-6 and cortisol responses to exercise in humans.
Moderate support for ‘preventing URS’
Cochrane review of 5 studies in heavy exercisers (n=598) shows ~50%
 decrease in URS 
taking vitamin C (0.25–1.0
 g/day).
Further support required
Unclear if antioxidants blunt adaptation in well-trained
Relatively small effects on cortisol compared with carbohydrate;
 immune measures no 
different from placebo
No support for ‘treating URS’
Cochrane reviews show no benefit of initiating vitamin C supplementation (>200
 mg/day) 
after onset of URS
.100 101
Carbohydrate (drinks, 
gels)
It maintains blood glucose during exercise, lowers stress 
hormones, and thus counters immune dysfunction.
Low-moderate support
Ingestion of carbohydrate (30–60
 g/hour) attenuates stress hormone and some
, but not all, 
immune perturbations during exercise.
Very limited evidence that this modifies infection risk in athletes
19 102
Bovine colostrum First milk of the cow that contains antibodies, growth 
factors and cytokines
Claimed to improve mucosal immunity and increase 
resistance to infection
Low-moderate support that bovine colostrum blunts the decrease in saliva antimicrobial 
proteins after heavy exercise
Some evidence in small numbers of participants that bovine colostrum decreases URS
Further support required
103 104
Polyphenols, for 
example, Quercetin
These are plant flavonoids. In vitro studies show strong 
anti-inflammatory, antioxidant and antipathogenic 
effects. Animal data indicate an increase in mitochondrial 
biogenesis and endurance performance.
Low-moderate support
Human studies show some reduction in URS during short periods of intensified training and 
mild stimulation of mitochondrial biogenesis and endurance performance, although in small 
numbers of untrained subjects.
Limited influence on markers of immunity
Putative antiviral effect for Quercetin
Further support required
105 106
Zinc This is an essential mineral that is claimed to reduce 
incidence and duration of colds. Zinc is required for DNA 
synthesis and as an enzyme cofactor for immune cells. 
Zinc deficiency results in impaired immunity (eg, lymphoid 
atrophy) and zinc deficiency is not uncommon in athletes.
No support for ‘preventing URS’
High doses of zinc can decrease immune function and should be avoided.
Moderate support for ‘treating URS’
Cochrane review shows benefit of zinc acetate lozenges (75
 mg) to decrease duration of 
URS;
 however, zinc must be taken <24
 hours after onset of URS for duration of cold only.
 
Side effects include bad taste and nausea.24
Glutamine This is a non-essential amino acid that is an important 
energy substrate for immune cells, particularly lymphocytes. 
Circulating glutamine is lowered after prolonged exercise 
and very heavy training.
Limited support
Supplementation before and after exercise does not alter immune perturbations.
Some evidence of a reduction in URS after endurance events in competitors receiving 
glutamine supplementation (2×5
 g)
Mechanism for therapeutic effect requires investigation.107 108
Caffeine This is a stimulant found in a variety of foods and drinks 
(eg, coffee and sports drinks). Caffeine is an adenosine 
receptor antagonist and immune cells express adenosine 
receptors.
Limited support
Evidence that caffeine supplementation activates lymphocytes and attenuates the fall in 
neutrophil function after exercise
Efficacy for altering URS in athletes remains unknown.
109 110
Echinacea This is a herbal extract claimed to enhance immunity via 
stimulatory effects on macrophages. There is some in vitro 
evidence for this.
Limited support
Early human studies indicated possible beneficial effects, but more recent, larger scale 
and better controlled studies indicate no effect of Echinacea on infection incidence or cold 
symptom severity.
111 112
Omega-3 PUFAs Found in fish oil
May influence immune function by acting as a fuel, in their 
role as membrane constituents or by regulating eicosanoid 
formation, for example, prostaglandin
Prostaglandin is immunosuppressive.
Claimed to exert anti-inflammatory effects postexercise
Limited support for blunting inflammation and functional changes after muscle-damaging 
eccentric exercise in humans and no evidence of reducing URS in athletes
113 114
Vitamin E An essential fat-soluble antioxidant vitamin that quenches 
exercise-induced ROS and augments immunity
No support
Immune-enhancing effects in the frail elderly but no benefit in young, healthy humans
One study actually showed that vitamin E supplementation increased URS in those under 
heavy exertion.
High doses may be pro-oxidative.
115 116
Continued
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on May 1, 2026 http://bjsm.bmj.com/Downloaded from 14 March 2018. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027 on Br J Sports Med: first published as

# Page 8

447
Maughan RJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:439–455. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027
Consensus statement
23 000 emergency department visits annually are reported to 
be associated with dietary supplement use. 30 This figure can be 
viewed as substantial, or it can be seen as small compared with 
the total number of adverse responses associated with the use 
of medications.
15 However, minor problems that do not require 
acute medical aid may still be sufficient to interrupt training or 
prevent participation, so this statistic probably underestimates 
the risk for athletes.
The biggest concern for athletes who compete under an anti-
doping code (usually the World Anti-Doping Code, as published 
by WADA) is that supplements can contain prohibited substances 
that result in an antidoping rule violation (ADRV). Athletes—
and their support teams—may be at risk for an ADRV if there 
is evidence that they have used or attempted to use products 
containing ingredients on the Prohibited List (www.
 wada.
 ama.
 
org). 
A common problem is the recording of an adverse analyt-
ical finding (AAF) of a prohibited substance in a urine sample 
(‘positive drug test’) as a result of supplement use.
31 Millions of 
athletes may be subject to antidoping testing, although these are 
mostly professional-level, national-level or international-level 
athletes. For these athletes in particular, even if the ingestion of 
the prohibited substance was unintentional, the rules of strict 
liability within the World Anti-Doping Code mean that an 
AAF will be recorded, and may mean the loss of medals won 
or records set, and financial sanctions as well as temporary or 
permanent suspension from competition. It also damages the 
athlete’s reputation and may lead to loss of employment and 
income through failed sponsorship opportunities. Where there 
has been deliberate cheating or benefit accrued from the use of a 
prohibited substance, these penalties seem entirely appropriate, 
but it is undoubtedly true that some ADRVs can be attributed 
to the innocent ingestion of prohibited substances in dietary 
supplements, with catastrophic results for the athlete.
One cause of an AAF arising from supplement use relates to an 
athlete’s failure to read product labels to recognise the presence 
of prohibited substances. Many athletes consider supplements 
to be ‘natural’ or ‘regulated’ and therefore safe. Other athletes 
are confused by the number of chemical names for some prohib-
ited substances and thus fail to recognise them on the product 
label. However, the most worrying cause of an inadvertent AAF 
is the use of supplements that contain prohibited substances as 
an undeclared ingredient or contaminant. Since the publication 
of the seminal study on the presence of undeclared prohibited 
substances in supplements,
32 there have been numerous reports 
of supplement contamination. 31 Recent reviews suggest that 
this problem remains 33 (http://www. informed- sport. com/ news/ 
australian-
 supplements-
 
survey-
 
highlights-
 
need-
 
testing). It is 
difficult to gain a perspective of the true prevalence of supplement 
contamination. Although the original study reported that
 ~15% 
of more than 600 products acq
uired from around the world 
contained undeclared prohormones, 32 this and other investiga-
tions rarely include a truly random sample of the supplements 
and sports foods used by athletes. Some individual products or 
categories of products can be considered inherently more at risk 
of contamination due to the country of origin, the manufacturer, 
the type of product and the range of declared ingredients 
(https://www.
 
usada.
 
org/
 
substances/
 
supplement-
 
411/). Never -
theless, it should also be recognised that common supplements, 
including vitamin C, multivitamins and minerals, have also been 
found, although rarely, to contain prohibited substances.
34 The 
range of prohibited substances found as undeclared ingredients 
in supplements now includes products from many sections of 
WADA's List of Prohibited Substances and Methods, including 
stimulants, anabolic agents, selective androgen receptor modula-
tors, diuretics, anorectics and β2 agonists.
33
In some cases, the amount of the prohibited substance in a 
supplement may be high, even higher than the normal thera-
peutic dose. For example, Geyer et al
35 reported the analysis 
of metandienone (commonly known as methandrostenolone or 
Dianabol) in high amounts in a ‘body building’ supplement from 
England. The recommended amount of the supplement would 
have supplied a dose of 10–43
 mg; in comparison, the typical 
therapeutic 
dose of this drug was 2.5–5
 mg/day
,36 although its 
medical use has been discontinued in most countries for many 
years. This amount would certainly have a potent anabolic 
effect, but would likely produce serious side effects, including 
psychiatric and behavioural effects, and significant damage to 
a range of body systems including the liver.
37 Unlike many of 
the earlier cases involving steroids related to nandrolone and 
testosterone, this is not a trivial level of contamination and raises 
the possibility of deliberate adulteration of the product with the 
intention of producing a measurable effect on muscle strength 
and muscle mass. Most reports of adverse health outcomes 
resulting from supplement use have focused on liver problems 
of varying degrees of severity, but other organs are also affected. 
One epidemiological case–control study
38 examined the associ-
ation between use of muscle-building supplements and testic-
ular germ cell cancer (TGCC) risk, with 356 TGCC cases and 
513 controls from eastern USA. The OR for the use of muscle-
building supplements in relation to risk of TGCC was elevated 
(OR=1.65, 95% CI 1.11 to 2.46), with significantly stronger 
associations for early users and longer periods of use.
Ironically, supplements that are contaminated with extremely 
small amounts of prohibited substances—too low to have any 
physiological effect—may still cause a positive doping outcome. 
For instance, ingestion of 19-norandrostenedione, a precursor 
of nandrolone, will result in the appearance in the urine of 
19-norandrosterone, the diagnostic metabolite for nandrolone. 
If the urinary concentration of 19-norandrosterone exceeds 
2
 ng/mL, an AAF is recorded. 39 The addition of as little as 
2.5
 µ
g of 19-norandrostenedione to a supplement can result in 
a urinary concentration of 19-norandrosterone that exceeds this 
threshold.
40 These amounts are close to the limits of detection 
of the analytical methods currently applied to the analysis of 
dietary supplements, and are far below the levels of contami-
nation deemed acceptable from a health and safety perspective.
Various efforts are being made to address the problems, 
including the use of third-party auditing activities to iden-
tify products that athletes may consider to be at ‘low risk’ of 
containing prohibited substances. There can be no absolute 
supplement p roposed mechanism of action e vidence for efficacy
β-glucans Polysaccharides derived from the cell walls of yeast, fungi, 
algae and oats that stimulate innate immunity
No support in humans
Effective in mice inoculated with influenza virus; however, human studies with athletes 
show no benefits.
117 118
PUFA, polyunsaturated  fatty acids;  ROS, reactive  oxygen species;  URS, upper  respiratory symptoms .
Table 4 Continued  
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on May 1, 2026 http://bjsm.bmj.com/Downloaded from 14 March 2018. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027 on Br J Sports Med: first published as

# Page 9

448
Maughan RJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:439–455. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027
Consensus statement
Table 5 Supplements that may assist with training capacity,  recovery, muscle soreness and injury management
supplement p roposed mechanism of action e vidence for efficacy41
Creatine monohydrate
Creatine is a naturally occurring nutrient, 
consumed in the diet and synthesised in 
the body. Recommended supplement dose 
is 20
 g/day for 5 days
, followed by 3–5
 g/
day to increase and maintain elev
ated body 
creatine levels.119 120
Enhanced adaptive response to exercise via increased 
growth factor/gene expression and increased intracellular 
water
Reduced symptoms of, or enhanced recovery from, 
muscle damaging exercise (eg, DOMS)
Enhanced recovery from disuse or immobilisation/
extreme inactivity
Improved cognitive processing
Decreased risk/enhanced recovery from mTBI
Many studies demonstrate improved training adaptations, such as 
increased lean mass or strength, indicating an enhanced adaptive 
response to exercise.
12 13 121
Reduced symptoms of, or enhanced recovery from, muscle damaging 
exercise (eg, DOMS) have been reported in some, but not all studies 
(reviewed in ref 
122).
Enhanced recovery from disuse or immobilisation/extreme
 inactivity has 
been reported in some
, but not all studies (reviewed in ref  12).
Improved cognitive processing is reported in most studies, especially 
when volunteers were fatigued by sleep deprivation or mental/physical 
tasks (reviewed in refs 
11 123–125). The effects in athletes have not been 
well-characterised, and only one group attempted to translate these 
effects to athletic performance, although with a positive result.
126
Decreased damage and enhanced recovery from mTBI are supported by 
open-label trials in children
127 128 and using animal models.129 These data 
are not conclusive and more research is warranted. However, athletes 
at risk for concussion, who already ingest creatine supplements for 
performance or muscular benefits, may receive important brain benefits 
as well.
A small increase in body mass is common with supplementation. This 
may be relevant for sports with weight classes/restrictions or where 
increased body mass may decrease performance.
Beta-hydroxy beta-methylbutyrate (HMB)
HMB is a metabolite of the amino acid 
leucine. Manufacturer-recommended dosage 
is 3
 
g/day.
Enhanced adaptive response to exercise via 
decreased protein breakdown, increased protein 
synthesis, increased cholesterol synthesis, increased 
growth hormone and IGF-I mRNA, increased proliferation 
and differentiation of satellite cells and inhibited 
apoptosis (reviewed in ref 
130)
Beneficial effects of HMB on strength and fat-free mass are small, while 
the effects on muscle damage are unclear.
131
Recent reports of ‘steroid like’ gains in strength, power and fat-
free mass, and reductions in muscle damage from HMB-free 
acid supplementation,
132–134 have not been reproduced and seem 
unlikely.135
Potential use for HMB during extreme inactivity/disuse or recovery 
from injury, but these effects have only been described in older adults 
following 10
 days of bed rest.136
Benefits of HMB supplementation could most likely be obtained from 
normal dietary protein or whole protein supplements,
137 so HMB 
supplements may not be more effective than adhering to the current 
protein intake recommendations.
Omega-3 fatty acids
About 2
 
g/day
Improved cognitive processing
Decreased risk/enhanced recovery from mTBI
Increased muscle protein synthesis
Reduced symptoms of, or enhanced recovery from, 
muscle damaging exercise (eg, DOMS)
Improved cognitive processing following omega-3 fatty acid 
supplementation shown in healthy older adult  with mild or severe 
cognitive impairment (reviewed in ref 
138). It is not known if these 
benefits would occur in young, healthy athletes, or how this would 
translate to athletic performance.
Animal data show that the structural damage and cognitive decline 
associated with mTBI are reduced/attenuated with omega-3 fatty 
acid supplementation when ingested either before or after the injury 
(reviewed in refs 
138–140). Two case studies support these findings,141 142 
and large, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials are currently under way 
(ClinicalTrials.gov NCT101903525 and  NCT01814527).
In muscle, omega-3 fatty acid supplementation can increase muscle 
protein synthesis,
143 144 but this may not occur when protein is ingested 
after exercise in recommended amounts.143 144
Anti-inflammatory effects of omega-3 fatty acid intake may reduce 
muscle damage or enhance recovery from intense, eccentric exercise (eg, 
decrease DOMS), but this is not a consistent finding.
145 146
No indication that decreased omega-3 fatty acids in the body impair 
performance, and high-dose supplements can cause some adverse effects 
(reviewed in refs 
114 139), so the best recommendation may be to include 
rich sources of omega-3 fatty acids, such as fatty fish, in the diet instead 
of supplements. Low risk but unclear if supplementation should be 
pursued by athletes, in lieu of including fatty fish in the diet as a source 
of omega-3 fatty acids.
Fish oil or omega-3 fatty acid supplement consumption could include 
heavy metal contaminants, or cause bleeding, digestive problems and/
or
 
increased LDL.
Continued
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on May 1, 2026 http://bjsm.bmj.com/Downloaded from 14 March 2018. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027 on Br J Sports Med: first published as

# Page 10

449
Maughan RJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:439–455. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027
Consensus statement
guarantee that any product is entirely safe, but these schemes 
do help the athlete to manage the risk. Athletes contemplating 
the use of dietary supplements should consider very carefully 
whether the possible benefits outweigh the risks of a doping 
offence that might end their career.
supplement p roposed mechanism of action e vidence for efficacy41
Vitamin D
An essential fat-soluble vitamin
Skin exposure to sunlight normally accounts 
for 90% of the source of vitamin D.
Enhanced adaptive response to exercise
Decreased stress fractures
Data on the effects of vitamin D supplementation on muscle function and 
recovery are equivocal, with discrepancies likely explained by differences 
in baseline vitamin D concentrations prior to supplementation.
147–150 
Collectively, these data strongly suggest a role for adequate vitamin D in 
the adaptive process to stressful exercise.
Low vitamin D status is associated with a 3.6× higher stress fracture 
risk in Finnish military recruits.
151 US Naval recruits supplemented with 
800 IU/day of vitamin D3 and 2000 mg calcium reduced stress fracture 
incidence by 20%.152 More data are needed, but it appears that vitamin 
D status relates to stress fracture risk, and supplementation, when 
warranted, may reduce this risk.
Gelatin and vitamin C/collagen
Recommended dose is 5–15
 g gelatin with 
50
 mg vitamin C.153
Collagen hydrolysate dose is about 10 g/
day.154 155
Increased collagen production
Thickened cartilage
Decreased joint pain
Gelatin and collagen supplements appear to be low risk.
Few data available,
153–155 but increased collagen production and 
decreased pain seem possible.
Functional benefits, recovery from injury, and effects in elite athletes are 
not known.
Anti-inflammatory supplements
Curcumin (a constituent of the spice 
turmeric) is often ingested for anti-
inflammatory effects at a dose of about 
5
 
g/day.
Tart cherry juice at a dose of about 250–
350
 mL (30
 mL if concentrate) twice daily for 
4–5 days before an athletic event or for 2–3 
days afterw
ards to promote recovery
Anti-inflammatory effects
Reduced symptoms of, or enhanced recovery, from 
muscle damaging exercise (eg, DOMS)
Decreases in inflammatory cytokines and/or indirect markers of muscle 
damage with anti-inflammatory supplements such as curcumin
156–158 and 
tart cherry juice (reviewed in refs  159 160) have been reported.
Anti-inflammatory effects may be beneficial, although benefits may be 
sport/training-specific. More research is needed before these compounds 
can be recommended to athletes.
DOMS, delayed-onset muscle soreness; mTBI, mild traumatic brain injury (concussion).
Table 5 Continued  
Table 6 Supplements promoted to assist with physique changes:  gain in lean mass and loss of body fat mass
supplement p roposed mechanism of action e vidence for efficacy25
gaining lbm *
Protein
Usually comprised isolated proteins from v
arious 
sources (whey and soy most common)
Recommended daily dose: 1.6
 g protein/kg/day 
optimal (up to 2.2
 g/kg/day with no adverse effects)
Recommended per
-meal doses: 0.3–0.5
 g protein/kg 
(3–4 times per day and in close temporal proximity to 
exercise
, with postexercise being consistently shown 
to be effective)
Enhances lean mass gains when ingested during 
programmes of resistance training due to increased 
provision of building blocks (amino acids) and leucine 
as a trigger for a rise in muscle protein synthesis and 
suppression of muscle protein breakdown
Meta-analyses focusing on younger and older participants 
have shown positive effects enhancing gains in muscle 
mass,
161 162 but effects are not large.
Leucine Stimulates muscle protein synthesis and suppresses protein 
breakdown (possibly through insulin)
Short-term mechanistic data available,
137 but no long-term 
trials showing efficacy163
l osing fat mass†
Protein
F
rom increased dietary sources or supplemental 
isolated proteins
Enhances fat mass loss and promotes retention of lean 
mass
Meta-analyses confirm small but significant effects of greater 
dietary protein in weight loss to enhance fat mass loss and 
promote lean mass retention.
164 165
Pyruvate No data Small to trivial effect166
Chromium Potentiates biological actions of insulin No effect167
Green tea (polyphenol catechins and caffeine) Thermogenic agent and/or lipolytic enhancing agent Small to trivial effect 168
α-Lipoic acid No clear role, but possible antioxidant Small to trivial effect169
Conjugated linolenic acid Changes membrane fluidity favouring enhanced fat 
oxidation
Small to trivial effect
170
Konjac fibre (glucomannan) Water-soluble polysaccharide—dietary fibre Small to trivial effect171
Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids No clear role, but possible appetite suppression, improved 
blood flow and/or modulator of gene expression
Small to trivial effect
172
Chitosan Lipid-binding agent to reduce lipid absorption Small to trivial effect173
*In combination with a progressive resistance exercise programmes.
†In combination with an exercise-induced and/or diet-induced energy deficit.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on May 1, 2026 http://bjsm.bmj.com/Downloaded from 14 March 2018. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027 on Br J Sports Med: first published as

# Page 11

450
Maughan RJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:439–455. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027
Consensus statement
pr ACTICAl I mpl ICATI ons A nd de CI s I on T ree
Dietary supplements are an established part of the landscape 
of modern sport and are likely to remain so. Athletes who take 
supplements often have no clear understanding of the poten-
tial effects of supplements they are using, but supplements 
should be used only after a careful cost-benefit analysis has been 
conducted. On one side of the decision tree are the rewards, 
the most obvious of which are correction of nutrient deficien-
cies, achievement of nutritional goals, or enhancement of one or 
another physiological/biochemical function to directly or indi-
rectly improve performance. On the other side lie the costs, the 
possibility of using an ineffective supplement, the possible risks 
to health and the potential for an ADRV . A flow of questions 
that could be posed in reaching an informed decision is shown 
in figures
 
2 and 3.
In deciding whether to use a supplement, athletes should 
consider all aspects of their maturation in, and preparation 
for, their event to ensure that the supplement under consider -
ation provides an advantage that no other strategy can address. 
Whether the supplement is practical to use should also be 
assessed: is the product available, affordable, tolerated and 
compatible with the athlete’s other goals? The input of the 
athlete’s coaching team and medical/science support network 
is important. Athletes who do not have regular access to such 
a network should consider decisions around supplement use as 
an important reason to consult an independent sports nutrition 
expert as well as a physician. Analysis of the evidence around the 
effectiveness of supplements and their safety is often difficult. 
A complete nutritional assessment may provide an appropriate 
justification for the specific use of nutritional supplements and 
sports foods. For a small number of sports supplements, there 
is good evidence of a performance effect or indirect benefit for 
some athletes in some specific situations with little or no risk of 
adverse outcomes.
28 41 Professional advice is often important in 
f igure 2 Flow chart to guide informed decision making and reducing risk of  antidoping rule violation during nutritional supplement use. MD, 
medical doctors.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on May 1, 2026 http://bjsm.bmj.com/Downloaded from 14 March 2018. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027 on Br J Sports Med: first published as

# Page 12

451
Maughan RJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:439–455. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027
Consensus statement
ensuring that the athlete is sufficiently knowledgeable about the 
appropriate protocol for use of these supplements, but individual 
athletes may respond very differently to a given supplement, with 
some exhibiting a markedly beneficial effect while others expe-
riencing no benefit or even a negative effect on performance. 
Furthermore, the situation in which the athlete wishes to use the 
supplement may differ in important ways from its substantiated 
use. Repeated trials may be necessary to establish whether a true 
effect, rather than just random variation, is seen in response to 
use of any novel intervention. Some trial and error may also be 
involved in fine-tuning the supplement protocol to suit the needs 
of the specific situation of use or the individual athlete.
Evidence to support the effectiveness and safety of many 
of the supplements targeted at athletes, however, is largely 
absent. There seems to be little incentive for those selling 
supplements to invest the substantial sums needed to under -
take detailed scientific evaluation of their products. Even 
where some evidence does exist, it may not be relevant to the 
high-performance athlete because of limitations in the study 
design (such as the specificity of the exercise tests), the study 
population or the context of use. Failure to verify the composi-
tion of the supplements used may also give misleading results. 
It seems sensible to exercise caution when using supplements, 
as any compound that has the potential to enhance health or 
exercise performance by altering physiological function must 
also have the potential for adverse effects in some individuals. 
Athletes should see good evidence of a performance or other 
benefit, and should be confident that it will not be harmful to 
health, before accepting the financial cost and the health or 
performance risks associated with any supplement. Finally, the 
athlete should be sure, if supplements or sports foods are to be 
used, that they have undertaken due diligence to source prod-
ucts that are at low risk of containing prohibited substances.
Con Clus Ion
Dietary supplements can play a small role in an athlete’s 
sports nutrition plan, with products that include essential 
micronutrients, sports foods, performance supplements and 
health supplements all potentially providing benefits. Some 
supplements, when used appropriately, may help athletes to 
meet sports nutrition goals, train hard, and
 
stay healthy and 
injury-free. A few supplements can directly enhance competi-
tion performance. However, it takes considerable effort and 
expert knowledge to identify which products are appropriate, 
how to integrate them into the athlete’s sports nutrition plan, 
and how to ensure that any benefits outweigh the possible 
negative side
 
effects, including the potential for an ADRV . A 
f igure 3 Flow chart to guide informed decision making and reducing risk of  antidoping rule violation during ergogenic supplement use.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on May 1, 2026 http://bjsm.bmj.com/Downloaded from 14 March 2018. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027 on Br J Sports Med: first published as

# Page 13

452
Maughan RJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:439–455. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027
Consensus statement
strict risk-benefit analysis involving a decision tree approach 
to the effectiveness, safety and risks should identify the small 
number of products that may benefit the athlete. Such an 
analysis requires the input of a well-informed sports nutrition 
professional.
Author affiliations
1School of Medicine, St Andrews University, St Andrews, UK
2Sports Nutrition, Australian Institute of Sport, Canberra, Australia
3Mary MacKillop Institute for Health Research, Melbourne, Australia
4Department of Neurology, Schulthess Clinic, Zurich, Switzerland
5Department of Family & Consumer Sciences (Human Nutrition), University of 
Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming, USA
6School of Human Sciences (Exercise and Sport Science), The University of Western 
Australia, Crawley, Western Australia, Australia
7Western Australian Institute of Sport, Mount Claremont, Australia
8Department of Kinesiology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada
9Department of Health, Nutrition, and Exercise Science, Messiah College, 
Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania, USA
10College of Health and Behavioural Sciences, Bangor University, Bangor, UK
11The Norwegian Olympic and Paralympic Committee and Confederation of Sport, 
Oslo, Norway
12Institute of Biochemistry, Center for Preventive Doping Research, German Sport 
University, Cologne, Germany
13Human Physiology Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussel, Belgium
14Department of Human Biology and Movement Sciences, NUTRIM School of 
Nutrition and Translational Research in Metabolism, Maastricht University Medical 
Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands
15Human Health & Nutritional Sciences, University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada
16BMJ, London, UK
17Department of Science and Medicine, World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), 
Montreal, Canada
18English Institute of Sport, Loughborough, UK
19Medical and Scientific Commission, International Olympic Committee, Lausanne, 
Switzerland
20Medical and Scientific Department, International Olympic Committee, Lausanne, 
Switzerland
21Anti-Doping Foundation, Stockholm, Sweden
22Human Health and Nutritional Sciences, Health and Performance, Centre University 
of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada
23Medical and Scientific Commission Games Group, International Olympic 
Committee, Lausanne, Switzerland
f
unding
 T
his research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the 
public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
Competing interests
 None declared.
p
rovenance and peer review
 Not commissioned;
 externally peer reviewed.
o
pen Access
 T
his is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work 
is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http://
 creativecommons
.
 org/
 
licenses/
 
by-
 
nc/
 
4.
 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
RefeRences
 1  Bailey RL,  Gahche JJ, Lentino CV , et al. Dietary supplement use in the United States, 
2003-2006. J Nutr 2011;141:261–6.
 2
 F
ennell D. Determinants of supplement usage. Prev Med 2004;39:932–9.
 3
 Supplements UNood.
 Dietary supplement health and education act of 1994. 1994. 
https://
 
ods.
 
od.
 
nih.
 
gov/
 
About/
 
DSHEA_
 
Wording.
 
aspx#
 
sec31994 (accessed 22 Nov 
2017).
 4
 Maughan RJ
, Depiesse F , Geyer H. International Association of Athletics 
Federations. The use of dietary supplements by athletes. J Sports Sci 
2007;25(Suppl 1):S103–13.
 5
 Garthe I,
 Maughan MRJ. Athletes and Supplements - prevalance and perspectives. 
Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. In Press. 2018.
 6
 Pr
asad AS. Zinc is an Antioxidant and Anti-Inflammatory Agent: Its Role in Human 
Health. Front Nutr 2014;1:14.
 7
 Solomons NW
. Mild human zinc deficiency produces an imbalance between cell-
mediated and humoral immunity. Nutr Rev 1998;56():27–8.
 8
 Stellingwerff 
T, Cox GR. Systematic review: Carbohydrate supplementation on 
exercise performance or capacity of varying durations. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 
2014;39:998–1011.
 9
 P
eake JM, Neubauer O, Walsh NP , et al. Recovery of the immune system after 
exercise. J Appl Physiol 2017;122:1077–87.
 10
 Steenge GR,
 Simpson EJ, Greenhaff PL. Protein- and carbohydrate-induced 
augmentation of whole body creatine retention in humans. J Appl Physiol 
2000;89:1165–71.
 11
 Gualano B
, Roschel H, Lancha AH, et al. In sickness and in health: the widespread 
application of creatine supplementation. Amino Acids 2012;43:519–29.
 12
 Heaton LE,
 Davis JK, Rawson ES, et al. Selected in-season nutritional strategies 
to enhance recovery for team sport athletes: a practical overview. Sports Med 
2017;47:2201–18.
 13
 Br
anch JD. Effect of creatine supplementation on body composition and 
performance: a meta-analysis. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2003;13:198–226.
 14
 Burk
e LM, Peeling P . Methodologies for investigating performance changes 
with supplement use. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2018. doi: 10.1123/
ijsnem.2017-0325. [Epub ahead of print].
 15
 Maughan RJ
, Shirreffs SM, Vernec A. Making decisions about supplement use. Int J 
Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. In Press. 2018.
 16
 Clark 
A, Mach N. The Crosstalk between the gut microbiota and mitochondria during 
Exercise. Front Physiol 2017;8:319.
 17
 Ribeiro IF
, Miranda-Vilela AL, Klautau-Guimarães MN, et al. The influence of 
erythropoietin (EPO T → G) and α-actinin-3 (ACTN3 R577X) polymorphisms 
on runners’ responses to the dietary ingestion of antioxidant supplementation 
based on pequi oil (Caryocar brasiliense Camb): a before-after study. J Nutrigenet 
Nutrigenomics 2013;6:283–304.
 18
 Larson-Meyer DE,
 Woolf K, Burke LM. Assessment of nutrient status in athletes and 
the need for supplementation. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2018. doi: 10.1123/
ijsnem.2017-0338. [Epub ahead of print].
 19
 Bermon S
, Castell LM, Calder PC, et al. Consensus Statement Immunonutrition and 
Exercise. Exerc Immunol Rev 2017;23:8–50.
 20
 Nik
olaidis MG, Kerksick CM, Lamprecht M, et al. Does Vitamin C and E 
supplementation impair the favorable adaptations of regular exercise? Oxid Med 
Cell Longev 2012;2012:1–11.
 21
 P
aulsen G, Cumming KT, Holden G, et al. Vitamin C and E supplementation hampers 
cellular adaptation to endurance training in humans: a double-blind, randomised, 
controlled trial. J Physiol 2014;592:1887–901.
 22
 P
owers S, Nelson WB, Larson-Meyer E. Antioxidant and Vitamin D supplements for 
athletes: sense or nonsense? J Sports Sci 2011;29(Suppl 1):S47–S55.
 23
 Hao Q
, Dong BR, Wu T. Probiotics for preventing acute upper respiratory tract 
infections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;2:CD006895.
 24
 Singh M,
 Das RR. Zinc for the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2013;6:CD001364.
 25
 Hector 
AJ, Phillips SM. Protein recommendations for weight loss in elite athletes: a 
focus on body composition and performance. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2018. doi: 
10.1123/ijsnem.2017-0273. [Epub ahead of print].
 26
 Mettler S
, Zimmermann MB. Iron excess in recreational marathon runners. Eur J Clin 
Nutr 2010;64:490–4.
 27
 Carr 
AJ, Gore CJ, Dawson B. Induced alkalosis and caffeine supplementation: effects 
on 2,000-m rowing performance. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2011;21:357–64.
 28
 P
eeling P , Binnie MJ, Goods PSR, et al. Evidence-based supplements for the 
enhancement of athletic performance. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2018. doi: 
10.1123/ijsnem.2017-0343. [Epub ahead of print].
 29
 Burk
e LM. Caffeine and sports performance. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 
2008;33:1319–34.
 30
 Geller 
AI, Shehab N, Weidle NJ, et al. Emergency department visits for adverse events 
related to dietary supplements. N Engl J Med 2015;373:1531–40.
 31
 Maughan RJ
. Contamination of dietary supplements and positive drug tests in sport. 
J Sports Sci 2005;23:883–9.
 32
 Geyer H,
 Parr MK, Mareck U, et al. Analysis of non-hormonal nutritional supplements 
for anabolic-androgenic steroids - results of an international study. Int J Sports Med 
2004;25:124–9.
 33  Martínez-Sanz JM,  Sospedra I, Ortiz CM, et al. Intended or unintended doping? A 
review of the presence of doping substances in dietary supplements used in sports. 
Nutrients 2017;9:1093.
 34
 Geyer H,
 Parr MK, Koehler K, et al. Nutritional supplements cross-contaminated and 
faked with doping substances. J Mass Spectrom 2008;43:892–902.
 35
 Geyer H,
 Bredehoft M, Marek U, et al. Hohe Dosen des Anabolikums Metandienon in 
Nahrungserganzungsmitteln. Deutsche Apotheke Zeit 2002;142:29.
 36
 Goodman LS
, Gilman A. Pharmacological basis of therapeutics. 5th edn: Macmillan 
Publishing Co, 1975:1462.
 37
 Solimini R,
 Rotolo MC, Mastrobattista L, et al. Hepatotoxicity associated with 
illicit use of anabolic androgenic steroids in doping. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 
2017;21:7–16.
 38
 Li N
, Hauser R, Holford T, et al. Muscle-building supplement use and increased risk of 
testicular germ cell cancer in men from Connecticut and Massachusetts. Br J Cancer 
2015;112:1247–50.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on May 1, 2026 http://bjsm.bmj.com/Downloaded from 14 March 2018. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027 on Br J Sports Med: first published as

# Page 14

453
Maughan RJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:439–455. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027
Consensus statement
 39  Baume N , Avois L, Schweizer C, et al. [13C]Nandrolone excretion in trained athletes: 
interindividual variability in metabolism. Clin Chem 2004;50:355–64.
 40
 W
atson P , Judkins C, Houghton E, et al. Urinary nandrolone metabolite detection 
after ingestion of a nandrolone precursor. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2009;41:766–72.
 41
 Rawson ES
, Miles MP , Larson-Meyer DE. Dietary supplements for health, adaptation, 
and recovery in athletes. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2018. doi: 10.1123/
ijsnem.2017-0340. [Epub ahead of print].
 42
 Hossein-nezhad 
A, Holick MF . Vitamin D for health: a global perspective. Mayo Clin 
Proc 2013;88:720–55.
 43
 Larson-Meyer DE,
 Willis KS. Vitamin D and athletes. Curr Sports Med Rep 
2010;9:220–6.
 44
 Heaney RP
. Vitamin D: criteria for safety and efficacy. Nutr Rev 2008;66:S178–S181.
 45
 T
homas DT, Erdman KA, Burke LM. American college of sports medicine joint 
position statement. Nutrition and athletic performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc 
2016;48:543–68.
 46
 Gibson RS
. Principles of nutritional assessment. Second Edn. New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press, 2005.
 47
 Moretti D
, Goede JS, Zeder C, et al. Oral iron supplements increase hepcidin and 
decrease iron absorption from daily or twice-daily doses in iron-depleted young 
women. Blood 2015;126:1981–9.
 48
 Spriet LL.
 Exercise and sport performance with low doses of caffeine. Sports Med 
2014;44 (Suppl 2):175–84.
 49
 Ganio MS
, Klau JF , Casa DJ, et al. Effect of caffeine on sport-specific endurance 
performance: a systematic review. J Strength Cond Res 2009;23:315–24.
 50
 F
rench C, McNaughton L, Davies P , et al. Caffeine ingestion during exercise 
to exhaustion in elite distance runners. Revision. J Sports Med Phys Fitness 
1991;31:425–32.
 51
 P
aton C, Costa V , Guglielmo L. Effects of caffeine chewing gum on race 
performance and physiology in male and female cyclists. J Sports Sci 
2015;33:1076–83.
 52
 T
alanian JL, Spriet LL. Low and moderate doses of caffeine late in exercise improve 
performance in trained cyclists. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 2016;41:850–5.
 53
 Wiles JD
, Coleman D, Tegerdine M, et al. The effects of caffeine ingestion on 
performance time, speed and power during a laboratory-based 1 km cycling time-
trial. J Sports Sci 2006;24:1165–71.
 54
 Schneik
er KT, Bishop D, Dawson B, et al. Effects of caffeine on prolonged 
intermittent-sprint ability in team-sport athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc 
2006;38:578–85.
 55
 W
ellington BM, Leveritt MD, Kelly VG. The effect of caffeine on repeat-high-
intensity-effort performance in rugby league players. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 
2017;12:206–10.
 56
 Bruce CR,
 Anderson ME, Fraser SF , et al. Enhancement of 2000-m rowing 
performance after caffeine ingestion. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2000;32:1958–63.
 57
 Maughan RJ
, Griffin J. Caffeine ingestion and fluid balance: a review. J Hum Nutr 
Diet 2003;16:411–20.
 58
 Rawson ES
, Persky AM. Mechanisms of muscular adaptations to creatine 
supplementation: review article. Int SportMed J 2007;8:43–53.
 59
 V
olek JS, Rawson ES. Scientific basis and practical aspects of creatine 
supplementation for athletes. Nutrition 2004;20(7-8):609–14.
 60
 Buford 
TW, Kreider RB, Stout JR, et al. International Society of Sports Nutrition 
position stand: creatine supplementation and exercise. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 
2007;4:6.
 61
 Lanhers C
, Pereira B, Naughton G, et al. Creatine Supplementation and Upper 
Limb Strength Performance: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Sports Med 
2017;47:163–73.
 62
 Hultman E,
 Soderlund K, Timmons JA, et al. Muscle creatine loading in men. J Appl 
Physiol 1996;81:232–7.
 63
 Maganaris CN
, Maughan RJ. Creatine supplementation enhances maximum 
voluntary isometric force and endurance capacity in resistance trained men. Acta 
Physiol Scand 1998;163:279–87.
 64
 Cooper R,
 Naclerio F , Allgrove J, et al. Creatine supplementation with specific view to 
exercise/sports performance: an update. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 2012;9:33.
 65
 Kreider RB
, Kalman DS, Antonio J, et al. International Society of Sports Nutrition 
position stand: safety and efficacy of creatine supplementation in exercise, sport, 
and medicine. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 2017;14:18.
 66
 Deminice R,
 Rosa FT, Franco GS, et al. Effects of creatine supplementation on 
oxidative stress and inflammatory markers after repeated-sprint exercise in humans. 
Nutrition 2013;29:1127–32.
 67
 Schilling BK,
 Stone MH, Utter A, et al. Creatine supplementation and health 
variables: a retrospective study. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2001;33:183–8.
 68
 P
owers ME, Arnold BL, Weltman AL, et al. Creatine Supplementation Increases Total 
Body Water Without Altering Fluid Distribution. J Athl Train 2003;38:44–50.
 69
 Bailey 
SJ, Winyard P , Vanhatalo A, et al. Dietary nitrate supplementation reduces the 
O2 cost of low-intensity exercise and enhances tolerance to high-intensity exercise 
in humans. J Appl Physiol 2009;107:1144–55.
 70
 T
hompson C, Wylie LJ, Fulford J, et al. Dietary nitrate improves sprint performance 
and cognitive function during prolonged intermittent exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol 
2015;115:1825–34.
 71  Wylie LJ , Bailey SJ, Kelly J, et al. Influence of beetroot juice supplementation on 
intermittent exercise performance. Eur J Appl Physiol 2016;116:415–25.
 72
 Jones 
AM. Dietary Nitrate Supplementation and Exercise Performance. Sports 
Medicine 2014;44:35–45.
 73
 Bailey SJ
, Varnham RL, DiMenna FJ, et al. Inorganic nitrate supplementation improves 
muscle oxygenation, O₂ uptake kinetics, and exercise tolerance at high but not low 
pedal rates. J Appl Physiol 2015;118:1396–405.
 74
 Bailey SJ
, Fulford J, Vanhatalo A, et al. Dietary nitrate supplementation enhances 
muscle contractile efficiency during knee-extensor exercise in humans. J Appl Physiol 
2010;109:135–48.
 75
 Hoon MW
, Jones AM, Johnson NA, et al. The effect of variable doses of inorganic 
nitrate-rich beetroot juice on simulated 2,000-m rowing performance in trained 
athletes. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 2014;9:615–20.
 76
 T
hompson C, Vanhatalo A, Jell H, et al. Dietary nitrate supplementation improves 
sprint and high-intensity intermittent running performance. Nitric Oxide 
2016;61:55–61.
 77
 Jones 
AM. Influence of dietary nitrate on the physiological determinants of exercise 
performance: a critical review. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 2014;39:1019–28.
 78
 McMahon NF
, Leveritt MD, Pavey TG. The effect of dietary nitrate supplementation 
on endurance exercise performance in healthy adults: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Sports Med 2017;47:735-756.
 79
 Reynolds CME,
 Halpenny C, Hughes C, et al. Acute ingestion of beetroot juice does 
not improve repeated sprint performance in male team sport athletes. Proc Nutr Soc 
2016;75:E97.
 80
 Wylie LJ
, Kelly J, Bailey SJ, et al. Beetroot juice and exercise: pharmacodynamic and 
dose-response relationships. J Appl Physiol 2013;115:325–36.
 81
 Lancha Junior 
AH, Painelli VS, Saunders B, et al. Nutritional strategies to modulate 
intracellular and extracellular buffering capacity during high-intensity exercise. Sports 
Med 2015;45 (Suppl 1):71–81.
 82
 Saunders B
, Elliott-Sale K, Artioli GG, et al. β-alanine supplementation to improve 
exercise capacity and performance: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J 
Sports Med 2017;51.
 83
 Baguet 
A, Bourgois J, Vanhee L, et al. Important role of muscle carnosine in rowing 
performance. J Appl Physiol 2010;109:1096–101.
 84
 Chung 
W, Shaw G, Anderson ME, et al. Effect of 10 week beta-alanine 
supplementation on competition and training performance in elite swimmers. 
Nutrients 2012;4:1441–53.
 85
 Nassis GP
, Sporer B, Stathis CG. β-alanine efficacy for sports performance 
improvement: from science to practice. Br J Sports Med 2017;51.
 86
 Bellinger PM.
 β-Alanine supplementation for athletic performance: an update. J 
Strength Cond Res 2014;28:1751–70.
 87
 Hobson RM,
 Saunders B, Ball G, et al. Effects of β-alanine supplementation on 
exercise performance: a meta-analysis. Amino Acids 2012;43:25–37.
 88
 Katz 
A, Costill DL, King DS, et al. Maximal exercise tolerance after induced alkalosis. 
Int J Sports Med 1984;5:107–10.
 89
 Mainwood GW
, Worsley-Brown P . The effects of extracellular pH and buffer 
concentration on the efflux of lactate from frog sartorius muscle. J Physiol 
1975;250:1–22.
 90
 Carr 
AJ, Hopkins WG, Gore CJ. Effects of acute alkalosis and acidosis on 
performance: a meta-analysis. Sports Med 2011;41:801–14.
 91
 Siegler JC
, Marshall PW, Bray J, et al. Sodium bicarbonate supplementation and 
ingestion timing: does it matter? J Strength Cond Res 2012;26:1953–8.
 92
 Lambert CP
, Greenhaff PL, Ball D, et al. Influence of sodium bicarbonate ingestion 
on plasma ammonia accumulation during incremental exercise in man. Eur J Appl 
Physiol Occup Physiol 1993;66:49–54.
 93
 Douroudos II,
 Fatouros IG, Gourgoulis V , et al. Dose-related effects of prolonged 
NaHCO3 ingestion during high-intensity exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc 
2006;38:1746–53.
 94
 Burk
e LM. Practical considerations for bicarbonate loading and sports performance. 
Nestle Nutr Inst Workshop Ser 2013;75:15–26.
 95
 Mc Naughton L,
 Thompson D. Acute versus chronic sodium bicarbonate ingestion 
and anaerobic work and power output. J Sports Med Phys Fitness 2001;41:456–62.
 96
 Carr 
AJ, Slater GJ, Gore CJ, et al. Effect of sodium bicarbonate on (HCO3-), pH, and 
gastrointestinal symptoms. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2011;21:189–94.
 97
 Requena B
, Zabala M, Padial P , et al. Sodium bicarbonate and sodium citrate: 
ergogenic aids? J Strength Cond Res 2005;19:213–24.
 98
 He 
CS, Aw Yong XH, Walsh NP , et al. Is there an optimal vitamin D status for 
immunity in athletes and military personnel? Exerc Immunol Rev 2016;22:42–64.
 99
 Gleeson M,
 Bishop NC, Oliveira M, et al. Daily probiotic’s (Lactobacillus casei 
Shirota) reduction of infection incidence in athletes. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 
2011;21:55–64.
 100
 Hemilä H,
 Chalker E. Vitamin C for preventing and treating the common cold. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;1:CD000980.
 101
 Nieman DC
, Henson DA, McAnulty SR, et al. Influence of vitamin C supplementation 
on oxidative and immune changes after an ultramarathon. J Appl Physiol 
2002;92:1970–7.
 102
 W
alsh NP , Gleeson M, Shephard RJ, et al. Position statement. part one: immune 
function and exercise. Exerc Immunol Rev 2011;17:6–63.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on May 1, 2026 http://bjsm.bmj.com/Downloaded from 14 March 2018. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027 on Br J Sports Med: first published as

# Page 15

454
Maughan RJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:439–455. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027
Consensus statement
 103 Brinkworth GD , Buckley JD. Concentrated bovine colostrum protein supplementation 
reduces the incidence of self-reported symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection 
in adult males. Eur J Nutr 2003;42:228–32.
 104
 Davison G
, Diment BC. Bovine colostrum supplementation attenuates the decrease 
of salivary lysozyme and enhances the recovery of neutrophil function after 
prolonged exercise. Br J Nutr 2010;103:1425–32.
 105
 Nieman DC
, Henson DA, Gross SJ, et al. Quercetin reduces illness but not immune 
perturbations after intensive exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2007;39:1561–9.
 106
 Gleeson M.
 Immunological aspects of sport nutrition. Immunol Cell Biol 
2016;94:117–23.
 107
 Castell LM,
 Poortmans JR, Newsholme EA. Does glutamine have a role in reducing 
infections in athletes? Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 1996;73:488–90.
 108
 W
alsh NP , Blannin AK, Robson PJ, et al. Glutamine, exercise and immune function. 
Links and possible mechanisms. Sports Med 1998;26:177–91.
 109
 Dulson DK,
 Bishop NC. Effect of a high and low dose of caffeine on human 
lymphocyte activation in response to antigen stimulation. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 
2016;41:224–7.
 110
 W
alker GJ, Finlay O, Griffiths H, et al. Immunoendocrine response to cycling 
following ingestion of caffeine and carbohydrate. Med Sci Sports Exerc 
2007;39:1554–60.
 111
 Linde K,
 Barrett B, Wölkart K, et al. Echinacea for preventing and treating the 
common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006;1:CD000530.
 112
 Karsch-V
ölk M, Barrett B, Linde K. Echinacea for preventing and treating the 
common cold. JAMA 2015;313:618–9.
 113
 J
akeman JR, Lambrick DM, Wooley B, et al. Effect of an acute dose of omega-3 fish 
oil following exercise-induced muscle damage. Eur J Appl Physiol 2017;117:575–82.
 114
 Mickleborough 
TD. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in physical performance 
optimization. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2013;23:83–96.
 115
 Meydani SN
, Han SN, Hamer DH. Vitamin E and respiratory infection in the elderly. 
Ann N Y Acad Sci 2004;1031:214–22.
 116
 Hemilä H,
 Virtamo J, Albanes D, et al. Physical activity and the common cold in men 
administered vitamin E and beta-carotene. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2003;35:1815–20.
 117
 Nieman DC
, Henson DA, McMahon M, et al. Beta-glucan, immune function, 
and upper respiratory tract infections in athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc 
2008;40:1463–71.
 118
 V
olman JJ, Ramakers JD, Plat J. Dietary modulation of immune function by beta-
glucans. Physiol Behav 2008;94:276–84.
 119
 Harris RC
, Söderlund K, Hultman E. Elevation of creatine in resting and exercised 
muscle of normal subjects by creatine supplementation. Clin Sci 1992;83:367–74.
 120
 Hultman E,
 Söderlund K, Timmons JA, et al. Muscle creatine loading in men. J Appl 
Physiol1996;81:232–7.
 121
 Rawson ES
, Volek JS. Effects of creatine supplementation and resistance 
training on muscle strength and weightlifting performance. J Strength Cond Res 
2003;17:822–31.
 122
 Rawson ES
, Clarkson PM, Tarnopolsky MA. Perspectives on exertional 
rhabdomyolysis. Sports Med 2017;47:33–49.
 123
 Gualano B
, Rawson ES, Candow DG, et al. Creatine supplementation in the 
aging population: effects on skeletal muscle, bone and brain. Amino Acids 
2016;48:1793–805.
 124
 Rae CD
, Bröer S. Creatine as a booster for human brain function. How might it 
work? Neurochem Int 2015;89:249–59.
 125
 Rawson ES
, Venezia AC. Use of creatine in the elderly and evidence for effects on 
cognitive function in young and old. Amino Acids 2011;40:1349–62.
 126
 Cook CJ
, Crewther BT, Kilduff LP , et al. Skill execution and sleep deprivation: effects 
of acute caffeine or creatine supplementation - a randomized placebo-controlled 
trial. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 2011;8:2.
 127
 Sak
ellaris G, Kotsiou M, Tamiolaki M, et al. Prevention of complications related to 
traumatic brain injury in children and adolescents with creatine administration: an 
open label randomized pilot study. J Trauma 2006;61:322–9.
 128
 Sak
ellaris G, Nasis G, Kotsiou M, et al. Prevention of traumatic headache, dizziness 
and fatigue with creatine administration. A pilot study. Acta Paediatr 2008;97:31–4.
 129
 Sulliv
an PG, Geiger JD, Mattson MP , et al. Dietary supplement creatine protects 
against traumatic brain injury. Ann Neurol 2000;48:723–9.
 130
 Szcześniak KA,
 Ostaszewski P , Fuller JC, et al. Dietary supplementation of β-hydroxy-
β-methylbutyrate in animals - a review. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 2015;99:405–17.
 131
 Rowlands DS
, Thomson JS. Effects of beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate 
supplementation during resistance training on strength, body composition, and 
muscle damage in trained and untrained young men: a meta-analysis. J Strength 
Cond Res 2009;23:836–46.
 132
 Lowery RP
, Joy JM, Rathmacher JA, et al. Interaction of beta-hydroxy-beta-
methylbutyrate free acid and adenosine triphosphate on muscle mass, 
strength, and power in resistance trained individuals. J Strength Cond Res 
2016;30:1843–54.
 133
 Wilson JM,
 Lowery RP , Joy JM, et al. The effects of 12 weeks of beta-hydroxy-beta-
methylbutyrate free acid supplementation on muscle mass, strength, and power in 
resistance-trained individuals: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. 
Eur J Appl Physiol 2014;114:1217–27.
 134  Wilson JM,  Lowery RP , Joy JM, et al. β-Hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate free acid reduces 
markers of exercise-induced muscle damage and improves recovery in resistance-
trained men. Br J Nutr 2013;110:538–44.
 135
 Phillips 
SM, Aragon AA, Arciero PJ, et al. Changes in body composition and 
performance with supplemental HMB-FA+ATP . J Strength Cond Res 2017:e71–e72.
 136
 Deutz NE,
 Pereira SL, Hays NP , et al. Effect of β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate 
(HMB) on lean body mass during 10 days of bed rest in older adults. Clin Nutr 
2013;32:704–12.
 137
 Wilkinson DJ
, Hossain T, Hill DS, et al. Effects of leucine and its metabolite 
β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate on human skeletal muscle protein metabolism. J Physiol 
2013;591:2911–23.
 138
 Barrett EC
, McBurney MI, Ciappio ED. ω-3 fatty acid supplementation as a potential 
therapeutic aid for the recovery from mild traumatic brain injury/concussion. Adv 
Nutr 2014;5:268–77.
 139
 Erdman J
, Oria M, Pillsbury L. Nutrition and traumatic brain injury: improving acute 
and subacute health coutcomes in military personnel. Washington, DC: National 
Academies Press, 2011.
 140
 T
ipton KD. Nutritional support for exercise-induced injuries. Sports Med 2015;45 
(Suppl 1):93–104.
 141
 Lewis M,
 Ghassemi P , Hibbeln J. Therapeutic use of omega-3 fatty acids in severe 
head trauma. Am J Emerg Med 2013;31:273.e5–8.
 142
 Roberts L,
 Bailes J, Dedhia H, et al. Surviving a mine explosion. J Am Coll Surg 
2008;207:276–83.
 143
 Smith GI,
 Atherton P , Reeds DN, et al. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids augment 
the muscle protein anabolic response to hyperinsulinaemia-hyperaminoacidaemia in 
healthy young and middle-aged men and women. Clin Sci 2011;121:267–78.
 144
 Smith GI,
 Atherton P , Reeds DN, et al. Dietary omega-3 fatty acid supplementation 
increases the rate of muscle protein synthesis in older adults: a randomized 
controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;93:402–12.
 145
 Gr
ay P , Chappell A, Jenkinson AM, et al. Fish oil supplementation reduces markers 
of oxidative stress but not muscle soreness after eccentric exercise. Int J Sport Nutr 
Exerc Metab 2014;24:206–14.
 146
 Jouris KB
, McDaniel JL, Weiss EP . The effect of Omega-3 fatty acid supplementation 
on the inflammatory response to eccentric strength exercise. J Sports Sci Med 
2011;10:432–8.
 147
 Close GL,
 Hamilton DL, Philp A, et al. New strategies in sport nutrition to increase 
exercise performance. Free Radic Biol Med 2016;98:144–58.
 148
 Close GL,
 Russell J, Cobley JN, et al. Assessment of vitamin D concentration in non-
supplemented professional athletes and healthy adults during the winter months in 
the UK: implications for skeletal muscle function. J Sports Sci 2013;31:344–53.
 149
 Owens DJ
, Sharples AP , Polydorou I, et al. A systems-based investigation into vitamin 
D and skeletal muscle repair, regeneration, and hypertrophy. Am J Physiol Endocrinol 
Metab 2015;309:E1019–31.
 150
 Owens DJ
, Webber D, Impey SG, et al. Vitamin D supplementation does not improve 
human skeletal muscle contractile properties in insufficient young males. Eur J Appl 
Physiol 2014;114:1309–20.
 151
 Ruohola JP
, Laaksi I, Ylikomi T, et al. Association between serum 25(OH)D 
concentrations and bone stress fractures in Finnish young men. J Bone Miner Res 
2006;21:1483–8.
 152
 Lappe J
, Cullen D, Haynatzki G, et al. Calcium and vitamin d supplementation 
decreases incidence of stress fractures in female navy recruits. J Bone Miner Res 
2008;23:741–9.
 153
 Shaw G
, Lee-Barthel A, Ross ML, et al. Vitamin C-enriched gelatin supplementation 
before intermittent activity augments collagen synthesis. Am J Clin Nutr 
2017;105:136–43.
 154
 Clark KL,
 Sebastianelli W, Flechsenhar KR, et al. 24-Week study on the use of 
collagen hydrolysate as a dietary supplement in athletes with activity-related joint 
pain. Curr Med Res Opin 2008;24:1485–96.
 155
 McAlindon 
TE, Nuite M, Krishnan N, et al. Change in knee osteoarthritis cartilage 
detected by delayed gadolinium enhanced magnetic resonance imaging 
following treatment with collagen hydrolysate: a pilot randomized controlled trial. 
Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2011;19:399–405.
 156
 McF
arlin BK, Venable AS, Henning AL, et al. Reduced inflammatory and muscle 
damage biomarkers following oral supplementation with bioavailable curcumin. BBA 
Clin 2016;5:72–8.
 157
 Nicol LM,
 Rowlands DS, Fazakerly R, et al. Curcumin supplementation 
likely attenuates delayed onset muscle soreness (DOMS). Eur J Appl Physiol 
2015;115:1769–77.
 158
 Sciberr
as JN, Galloway SD, Fenech A, et al. The effect of turmeric (Curcumin) 
supplementation on cytokine and inflammatory marker responses following 2 hours 
of endurance cycling. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 2015;12:5.
 159
 Coelho Rabello Lima L,
 Oliveira Assumpção C, Prestes J, et al. Consumption 
of cherries as a strategy to attenuate exercise-induced muscle damage and 
inflammation in humans. Nutr Hosp 2015;32:1885–93.
 160
 Bell PG
, McHugh MP , Stevenson E, et al. The role of cherries in exercise and health. 
Scand J Med Sci Sports 2014;24:477–90.
 161
 Morton RW
, Murphy KT, McKellar SR, et al. A systematic review, meta-analysis and 
meta-regression of the effect of protein supplementation on resistance training-
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on May 1, 2026 http://bjsm.bmj.com/Downloaded from 14 March 2018. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027 on Br J Sports Med: first published as

# Page 16

455
Maughan RJ, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:439–455. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027
Consensus statement
induced gains in muscle mass and strength in healthy adults. Br J Sports Med 
2018;52:376–84.
 162
 Cermak NM,
 Res PT, de Groot LC, et al. Protein supplementation augments the 
adaptive response of skeletal muscle to resistance-type exercise training: a meta-
analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;96:1454–64.
 163
 Aguiar 
AF , Grala AP , da Silva RA, et al. Free leucine supplementation during an 
8-week resistance training program does not increase muscle mass and strength in 
untrained young adult subjects. Amino Acids 2017;49:1255–62.
 164
 Wycherley 
TP , Moran LJ, Clifton PM, et al. Effects of energy-restricted high-
protein, low-fat compared with standard-protein, low-fat diets: a meta-analysis of 
randomized controlled trials. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;96:1281–98.
 165
 Krieger JW
, Sitren HS, Daniels MJ, et al. Effects of variation in protein and 
carbohydrate intake on body mass and composition during energy restriction: a 
meta-regression 1. Am J Clin Nutr 2006;83:260–74.
 166
 Onakpoy
a I, Hunt K, Wider B, et al. Pyruvate supplementation for weight loss: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Crit Rev Food Sci 
Nutr 2014;54:17–23.
 167
 T
ian H, Guo X, Wang X, et al. Chromium picolinate supplementation for overweight 
or obese adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;11:Cd010063.
 168  Jurgens TM,  Whelan AM, Killian L, et al. Green tea for weight loss and weight 
maintenance in overweight or obese adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2012;12:Cd008650.
 169
 K
ucukgoncu S, Zhou E, Lucas KB, et al. Alpha-lipoic acid (ALA) as a supplementation 
for weight loss: results from a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Obes 
Rev 2017;18:594–601.
 170
 Onakpoy
a IJ, Posadzki PP , Watson LK, et al. The efficacy of long-term conjugated 
linoleic acid (CLA) supplementation on body composition in overweight and obese 
individuals: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Eur J 
Nutr 2012;51:127–34.
 171
 Onakpoy
a I, Posadzki P , Ernst E. The efficacy of glucomannan supplementation 
in overweight and obesity: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized 
clinical trials. J Am Coll Nutr 2014;33:70–8.
 172
 Zhang YY
, Liu W, Zhao TY , et al. Efficacy of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids 
supplementation in managing overweight and obesity: a meta-analysis of 
randomized clinical trials. J Nutr Health Aging 2017;21:187–92.
 173
 Jull 
AB, Ni Mhurchu C, Bennett DA, et al. Chitosan for overweight or obesity. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008;3:Cd003892.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
. by guest on May 1, 2026 http://bjsm.bmj.com/Downloaded from 14 March 2018. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027 on Br J Sports Med: first published as

